---
title: The Good and the Convenient
date: 2019-04-15
tags: post_en
author: Louis Ramirez
---

> “Perhaps I might venture that if our species were actually to solve its most dire problems, a lot of us in this room would be out of a job. Or perhaps in jail.” — _Benjamin Bratton in a Ted Talk_

Sometime in the February of 2019, a man called Guy Cormier walked onto the stage of a Montreal business school and proclaimed that capitalism had to change. That of the next thirty years, he declared, would have to be different from that of the last thirty. How exactly, he didn’t specify, keeping himself instead to the generic idea that profit could no longer be sacrosanct. Around the same time, some two and a half thousand miles away, an elite university professor and his highly intelligent partner slept safely in the belief of their own moral correctness. Being similarly privileged, their own point of pride was that they had tried in their lives to do what was right. Again, an ocean away, back in Québec, a crowd of well-dressed hip young people with college degrees busied themselves in a reused warehouse. The walls adorned with slickly designed “roadmaps”, they worked tirelessly on highly aesthetic visions of social change, powered with cash generated by none other than Cormier’s business.

What I want to argue is that, in staking a moral claim to being drivers of social progress, elites like Cormier, the prof, and the innovators form the cast of a play that might be called _The Good and the Convenient._ In this play, I propose, our characters also share in the same fundamentally flawed moral outlook. What’s more, I suggest this outlook is one they have inherited from a different time. To explain, the play is set in a time of turbulence. Words like “systems thinking” and “complexity” abound in all our scenes, a testament to the massively overdue humility that history has forced upon our cast. In common talk, one might say that the characters all spend significant amounts of time scratching their heads. You see, “systems thinkers” know that when many things are tied together, they can suddenly change dramatically as a result of a tiny disturbance in one of them. As I understand it, today, it’s uncontroversial to state that all of our characters are caught in one such giant historical disturbance. Compounded effects have catapulted their world into a set of convulsions they struggle to understand. And what I want to say is that, morally, they haven’t quite caught up.

Because it wasn’t always like this. Nor was it ever meant to _be like this_. To explain, after the Second World War, the world enjoyed a kind of “good phase”. I like to think of it a bit like someone who struggles with their own instability enjoying a kind of “roll”—a couple of good dates within the space of a few months, a job offer, maybe a successful grad school entry. The point being that, high off the wins, this person can easily take success and the rush for granted: this time, they’ve “made it”. So, as I like to see it (not having experienced most of this time myself), a series of happenings over the course of the 20th century led the western world, and therefore the cast of our play, to believe that, morally, they’d collectively somehow _made it_. Defeating the Nazis, “decolonization”, the Civil Rights Movement, the end of Apartheid, massive increases in life expectancy and, eventually, the fall of the Berlin Wall relegated the atrocities of the Vietnam War and the ever-increasingly quick degradation of our habitat to the footnotes of history. Confident that the world was getting better as their lives were getting nicer, a host of people spent the best days of their lives patting themselves on the back.

It’s only once we take stock of this background that we can make sense of our characters’ own back-patting. What I’m saying, to be more precise, is that the moral thinking implicit in their own prophecies of positive differences smacks of the good old days they won’t let go of; that their claims might have been at home in the time just after the fall of the Berlin wall, when Fukuyama triumphantly declared the “end of history”. In other words, to understand how Cormier, the professor, and the innovators seem to understand morality, we have to contextualize it historically and situate it within a bygone era. Whether or not this understanding was ever justified is neither here nor there. What is important for my purposes today is to stress that the way that many such optimistic and left-leaning elites see right and wrong is a delusional bastard child of the late 20th century and has no place in our political context. To see this, we need to take a brief detour into the lives of these fine people.

As well as being wrong (and I will come to that) our three characters share the trait of being brilliant. Cormier is the CEO of a major financial institution, the _Mouvement Desjardins_, which prides itself on being a cooperative. His intention is to modernize it and make people love it, particularly the young. Outside of his carefully orchestrated PR stunt, what he isn’t telling you is that he needs the young; because when the boomers die off they’ll leave _a lot_ of money behind, and whichever bank wins the youth will take the whole pot. Our professor is a global expert in his field and consults with prestigious institutions. He doesn’t earn as much as Cormier, but what he doesn’t get in $ he gets in social capital. Having never once voted conservative, and being a generous giver to charity, he skirts the fact that his carbon footprint is apocalyptic, and the system that supports his glory is twelve years away from “cancelling” the last fifty years of population growth. Our innovators, on their end, run projects that are intellectually and morally stimulating. _Their_ accountants track the measurable social impact of their work instead of profits. It seems they have the best of both worlds, middle-class salaries and a good night’s sleep after the shift. They may also be some of the closest employees to believe the WeWorking class’s mantra that one’s work must be their passion. But while they always traffic in talk “theories of change” and “systems change”, it’s far from clear how their own industry, powered by corporate money, could ever bring about the change they know full well is necessary. What they might not be willing to admit is that when the lives of billions of people less fortunate than them are on the line, they’re essentially going for what’s “good enough. All told, I wonder whether they’re relevantly different from Cormier, and I wonder if they entertain this thought when, trained in critical thinking since age 6, they’re clearly equipped to.

Our _do-gooding_ characters all share in the fact that they dedicate significant parts of their lives to projects that are ostensibly morally righteous, extremely convenient to them, and pose little to no threat to anyone in power. This complacency would make sense if one had faith that the world was slowly being better. In such a world, our protagonists would be allowed the humble comfort of being a small part of history’s steady march towards progress. If society is improving and historical forces are pushing us towards progress, then doing good does not require us to do anything countercultural: we can simply go with the flow and integrate the mainstream, safe in the knowledge that we are part of the solution. Hence my point: the moral outlook of our kindly liberal elites betrays the liberal humanism of the second half of the 20th century, except it’s now unfolding in front of our eyes when society is on the verge of a climatic catastrophe whose human toll will make Stalin look like a boy scout. Scratching their heads at the complexity they purport to embrace, our characters are navigating the world of Donald Trump, Xi Jing Ping, and Vladimir Putin like it’s 1999. With all their brilliance and complexity theorizing, they omit the inconvenient detail that they are perpetuating an illusion they inherit from a time that is no more. And perhaps this is fair enough: as I said, they are caught in the midst of a seismic cultural shift, where a new order “emerges” out of their own systems’ dynamics.

For their moral anachronism, perhaps they can be excused: tracing back one’s perspective to a different historical period is not easy. This being said, my point is not just that our characters’ view of social progress is a historical vestige. It’s also that it’s wrong, and wrong for reasons that should actually be immediately obvious to them. In every case, these characters’ capacity to do good is dependent on other people’s capacity to do twice as much evil. Cormier’s rebranded capitalism still hinges on profits from climate devastation and the maintenance of corrupt friendships between oil and finance executives. The professor’s social prestige is similarly (if differently) tied to our current form of social organisation. And our social innovators are not only funded by Cormier’s gang, they’re also part of a tiny elite dedicating themselves to a societal project that we have few reasons to believe in: corporate cash funding a rapid transformation into a sustainable and equal society. If your doing good is dependent on someone doing evil, you don’t get a clear conscience.

Despite this, our characters have their cake and eat it too, enjoying the exact same privileges that the corporate elite does, plus a false sense of altruism. This is directly tied to their dependence on the mode of social organizing that creates the injustices they half-try to address. If they wanted to make a difference beyond the bare minimum necessary for a good PR hit, the characters would have to actually challenge some vested interests. In a very complex world, this actually strikes me as relatively simple: since there are some people who profit off the problems many of us suffer from, you won’t handle those problems without confronting someone. And in doing so, you may have to suffer a loss of prestige. Some way or another, _you’ll have to sacrifice_. This is what’s lacking in this approach to social progress: the good is rarely convenient. All told, our characters represent an allocation of moral prestige in which being considered altruistic does not, at any point, require you to forfeit your own interests for those of others in any significant way.

We need to change the way we allocate this prestige. In 2019, battle lines have been drawn between those who want radical change towards a sustainable and inclusive future, and those who sponsor unpredictably catastrophic scenarios culminating in the total collapse of our societies. Instead of ending in 1991, “History” stretches deep into the 21st century and is the set in which our play will unfolds. There, the fight against existential threats facing humanity and the whole of life on earth is one between love and hate, good and evil. To be on the right of it requires siding against those who profit off destruction. It strikes me as a profoundly sad and highly inconvenient contingency that, since our characters seem unable to do just this, the _Good and the Convenient_ is actually a tragedy, the theme of which is comfortable delusion, and where the plot describes our brightest making a series of spectacular mistakes, motivated by convenience but performed all in the name of ‘reason’. But their mistakes make the comfort they’re accustomed to ever harder to get. At one point it’ll run out; and of course it’ll be way too late for reason then. _Curtain drops, and no one claps._
